1. Introduction
Authentication is a fundamental requirement of almost every web application. Whether you're building a simple REST API, a full-stack web application, or a microservice, at some point you need to verify who your users are before letting them near anything sensitive. Despite being a well-understood problem, authentication remains one of the most time-consuming parts of starting a new project. Developers end up reimplementing the same patterns over and over — password hashing, token generation, session management — often getting something subtly wrong in the process.

The consequences of poorly implemented authentication are well documented. Common mistakes include storing passwords in plaintext, using fast general-purpose hashes, generating predictable tokens, failing to invalidate sessions on logout, and neglecting token expiry. The Open Web Application Security Project's Top Ten list consistently identifies broken authentication and identification failures as among the most critical risks facing modern web applications (OWASP, 2021). For developers working under time pressure — particularly those building prototypes or academic projects — getting authentication right alongside the core application logic is a significant burden.

Existing solutions tend to fall into two broad categories. The first is hosted identity providers: Auth0, Supabase Auth, Firebase Authentication. These are mature and feature-rich, and they handle authentication concerns entirely on behalf of the developer. But they introduce external dependencies, require internet connectivity and account registration, and in many cases come with vendor lock-in and usage-based pricing (Okta, 2024). For local development or academic projects, those trade-offs are often unacceptable. The second category is authentication libraries — Passport.js for Node.js (Hanson, 2024), Devise for Ruby on Rails, and similar tools. These reduce the implementation burden but are inherently language-specific. A developer building a Python API cannot use a Node.js authentication library.

A third option is framework scaffolding, most notably Laravel Breeze, which generates authentication boilerplate directly into a project with a single command (Laravel, 2024). It's fast and opinionated, which makes it genuinely useful — but only if you're already in the Laravel ecosystem. It does nothing for anyone working outside it.

ezauth takes a different approach. Rather than a library or a hosted service, it's a standalone authentication server distributed as a single binary. It exposes a REST API over HTTP, which means any application — regardless of programming language or framework — can integrate authentication by making HTTP requests. A Python script, a Go service, a plain HTML page with fetch, and a mobile app can all authenticate against the same ezauth instance without any shared dependencies. The only requirement is the ability to make an HTTP request, and every modern programming language can do that.

The design is specifically tailored to the local development context. ezauth can be started with a single command and needs no external infrastructure. On first run, it operates in an ephemeral in-memory mode that's suitable for quick testing. When you need persistence, it supports file-based and SQLite storage, configurable through a YAML file generated by the ezauth init command. A set of demo pages — served directly by the binary — provides a working login and registration interface out of the box.

The primary goals of this project were: to design and implement a language-agnostic authentication server suitable for local development; to expose a clean, consistent REST API covering the full authentication lifecycle (registration, login, token refresh, and logout); to support multiple storage backends through an extensible repository interface; and to distribute the server as a single binary with no runtime dependencies.

The remainder of this report is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the background on authentication mechanisms and existing tooling. Section 3 describes the development methodology. Section 4 defines the system requirements and discusses key design decisions. Section 5 details the implementation. Section 6 covers testing. Section 7 evaluates the project against its requirements, and Section 8 concludes with limitations and future work.

2. Background and Literature Review
2.1 Authentication and Authorisation
Authentication and authorisation are closely related but distinct concerns that are frequently conflated in practice. Authentication is about verifying identity — confirming that a user is who they claim to be. Authorisation is about what that authenticated user is allowed to do. A well-designed system keeps these responsibilities separate, typically implemented by different components (Hardt, 2012; NIST, 2017). ezauth handles authentication only; authorisation — role-based access control and the like — is left to the consuming application. That decision is discussed further in Section 4.

2.2 Password Storage
The most fundamental requirement of any authentication system is secure password storage. Storing passwords in plaintext is simply not acceptable — a database breach immediately exposes every credential (OWASP, 2024). Early approaches used fast cryptographic hashes like MD5 or SHA-1, but speed is actually the problem here: a modern consumer GPU can compute billions of hashes per second, making exhaustive searches across common passwords trivially fast (Hashcat, 2023).

The accepted solution is an adaptive hashing algorithm that is deliberately slow. bcrypt, introduced by Provos and Mazières (1999), is widely recommended for this purpose and explicitly endorsed by OWASP's Password Storage Cheat Sheet (OWASP, 2024). Its configurable cost factor allows computational cost to scale with improving hardware, and the built-in random salt means two identical passwords will always produce different hashes, which defeats precomputed rainbow table attacks. ezauth uses bcrypt for all password hashing via the golang.org/x/crypto package.

One non-obvious property of bcrypt is that it silently truncates inputs longer than 72 bytes (OpenBSD, 2023). Two passwords sharing the same first 72 bytes produce the same hash, which could in principle be exploited. ezauth handles this by enforcing a maximum password length of 72 characters at the input validation layer, before anything reaches the hashing function.

2.3 Token-Based Authentication
Traditional web authentication relied on server-side sessions: the server stores session state and gives the client a session identifier, usually in a cookie. This works well enough, but it has real drawbacks in distributed systems — the server must maintain state, sessions don't transfer naturally across services, and horizontal scaling requires a shared session store (Fielding, 2000; Richardson and Ruby, 2007).

Token-based authentication sidesteps these issues by encoding session state in a token issued to the client. The most widely adopted standard is JSON Web Token (JWT), defined in RFC 7519 (Jones, Bradley and Sakimura, 2015). A JWT has three Base64URL-encoded components separated by periods: a header specifying the signing algorithm, a payload containing claims, and a signature. The claims encode things like the user identifier, the expiry time, and any additional data the issuer wants to include. The signature — computed over the header and payload using a secret key — lets the server verify the token hasn't been tampered with.

ezauth uses HMAC-SHA256 signed JWTs via the golang-jwt/jwt library. The access token payload includes the user's ID, email address, and an expiry timestamp. Because the token is self-contained and verifiable without a database lookup, protected routes can validate requests efficiently by checking the signature and expiry alone.

The well-known limitation of JWTs is that they can't easily be invalidated before they expire. A token remains valid until its expiry even if the user logs out — this is just an inherent property of stateless tokens (Peyrott, 2018). ezauth mitigates this by issuing short-lived access tokens (defaulting to five minutes), which limits the exposure window if a token is compromised.

2.4 Refresh Token Rotation
Short access token lifetimes are good for security, but terrible for user experience if people have to re-authenticate every few minutes. The standard answer is the refresh token pattern (Hardt, 2012): alongside the short-lived access token, the server issues a long-lived refresh token. When the access token expires, the client presents the refresh token to get a new one, no re-entry of credentials required.

ezauth implements refresh token rotation, a security enhancement recommended by the OAuth 2.0 Security Best Current Practice (Lodderstedt et al., 2023). On each refresh, the server issues a new access token and a new refresh token, and immediately invalidates the old refresh token. If a refresh token is stolen and used by an attacker, the legitimate client's next refresh attempt will fail, creating a detectable signal of compromise (Lodderstedt et al., 2023). Refresh tokens are cryptographically random 32-byte values stored as bcrypt hashes in the user record, so a database breach doesn't hand over usable tokens.

2.5 Existing Tooling
Auth0 and Supabase Auth are hosted identity providers that handle authentication entirely as a managed service. Both are mature, well-documented, and support a wide range of authentication methods including social login, multi-factor authentication, and SSO (Okta, 2024; Supabase, 2024). But both require account registration, internet connectivity, and — beyond hobbyist usage — come with pricing. For local development, relying on an external service adds friction, latency, and a point of failure outside the developer's control. There's also a privacy angle: credentials and metadata are transmitted to and stored by a third party, which may be undesirable in academic or experimental contexts.

Keycloak is a self-hosted, open-source identity management solution (Red Hat, 2024). It supports OAuth 2.0, OpenID Connect, and SAML, and has sophisticated features like identity brokering and user federation. The problem is it requires a running JVM and a relational database, and its configuration — managed through an extensive web console — is substantial. Keycloak is built for enterprise production deployments, not for a developer who wants auth working in minutes.

Passport.js is an authentication middleware for Node.js, not a standalone server (Hanson, 2024). It integrates into an Express application as a library, which makes it language-specific by design. A developer building a Python or Go application can't use it at all. And even for Node.js developers, Passport.js still delegates token generation, storage, and session management to the application — it reduces the work rather than removing it.

Laravel Breeze is probably the closest analogue to ezauth in terms of developer experience (Laravel, 2024). A single Artisan command scaffolds a complete authentication system into a Laravel application, and the result requires little understanding of what's happening underneath. But Breeze is inseparable from Laravel and PHP. Step outside that ecosystem and you're on your own.

Looking across these options, the gap is clear. Hosted providers are low-friction but bring external dependencies that aren't appropriate for local development. Self-hosted solutions like Keycloak are too heavyweight for prototyping. Libraries like Passport.js are language-bound. Framework scaffolding tools are fast and convenient but locked to a specific stack. No existing tool, as far as the author is aware, provides a ready-to-use authentication server that works from any language, needs no external infrastructure, and is up and running in under a minute. That's the gap ezauth is designed to fill.

3. Methodology
3.1 Development Approach
This project was developed by a single developer over the course of an academic semester. Rather than a plan-driven approach like waterfall, an iterative, feature-driven approach was used, drawing on principles from agile development and Extreme Programming (XP) — specifically the XP emphasis on small releases, simple design, and continuous refactoring (Beck and Andres, 2004), alongside the agile principle of delivering working software frequently (Beck et al., 2001).

The system was built feature by feature. Each piece was taken from initial design through to a working and tested HTTP endpoint before the next was started. A typical cycle involved defining the expected API behaviour — inputs, outputs, error cases — implementing the service logic, wiring it up through an HTTP handler, and verifying the behaviour through both manual testing against the running server and automated integration tests. This cycle repeated for registration, login, token refresh, logout, the protected route, and the health check.

An iterative approach suited this project well. The high-level requirements of an authentication system are well understood, but several important details only emerge during implementation. The 72-byte truncation limit in bcrypt (Provos and Mazières, 1999) and the precise handling of JWT expiry and refresh flows (Jones, Bradley and Sakimura, 2015) are genuinely difficult to fully anticipate upfront. Building incrementally meant these issues surfaced early and could be fed back into subsequent decisions rather than requiring large reworks.

Refactoring happened continuously rather than being deferred. The repository abstraction, for example, was introduced after the initial in-memory implementation, once it was clear that file-based and SQLite backends would be needed. Error handling was standardised partway through after inconsistencies between endpoints became obvious. This reflects the XP principle of keeping design simple and letting it evolve (Beck and Andres, 2004) — the design improved as understanding improved.

3.2 Technology Selection
The system is implemented in Go 1.22. The main reason for choosing Go was its ability to compile to a single statically linked binary with no runtime dependencies, which directly supports the goal of a lightweight, locally deployable service. No containerisation, no managed runtime — you download the binary and run it.

Go's standard library also includes a production-capable HTTP server, which meant the system could be built without a third-party web framework. This kept the dependency footprint small and reduced the attack surface from external code. The language's strong typing and explicit error handling are particularly valuable in a security-sensitive context, where silent failures can lead to incorrect behaviour in the worst possible places.

JSON Web Tokens were chosen for access token management over server-side sessions. JWTs are a widely adopted open standard (Jones, Bradley and Sakimura, 2015) and their stateless nature suits the language-agnostic goal well — any client that can verify an HMAC-SHA256 signature can validate a token. The golang-jwt/jwt library was used for signing and verification, chosen for its widespread adoption and active maintenance.

For password hashing, bcrypt via golang.org/x/crypto was used. OWASP recommends bcrypt for password storage (OWASP, 2021) and using the established library avoids the well-known risks of implementing cryptographic primitives from scratch.

SQLite was chosen as the primary persistent storage backend. To preserve the single-binary model, the modernc.org/sqlite driver was used rather than the more common mattn/go-sqlite3, which depends on CGO and requires a C toolchain at build time. The pure-Go driver means consistent cross-platform builds without extra dependencies.

Configuration is handled using Viper (spf13, 2024), which provides a single interface for loading values from YAML files, environment variables, and defaults. GitHub Actions handles the build and release pipeline — on each version tag, binaries are produced for Windows, macOS (Intel and Apple Silicon), and Linux, making distribution reproducible and independent of the development machine.

3.3 Testing Strategy
Testing was approached pragmatically. A mix of test-first and test-after was used depending on how well-understood the expected behaviour was at the time.

For well-defined functionality — HTTP response codes, error formats — tests were written before or alongside implementation. They gave a concrete spec to work towards. In other cases, particularly when figuring out the structure of storage backends, tests were written once the implementation had stabilised enough to specify clearly.

Integration tests were prioritised over unit tests because the system's primary interface is its HTTP API. Testing end-to-end gives more confidence that routing, business logic, and storage interact correctly. A unit test that mocks the repository and checks that the handler calls the right method says very little about whether the full request-to-response path actually works. This is consistent with Fowler's (2018) argument that integration-level tests provide stronger guarantees about system behaviour — the trade-off is slower execution and less precise failure localisation, but given the size of the suite and its fast runtime, that wasn't a problem in practice. Security-sensitive behaviour — token rotation, duplicate account handling, server-side logout — was given particular attention, since mistakes there have the highest consequences.

One thing the tests proved immediately useful for: finding inconsistencies between components. An early failure revealed that the JWT middleware returned plain-text error responses while all other endpoints returned structured JSON. That inconsistency only showed up because there was a test looking at the actual response format.

3.4 Version Control and Tooling
Git was used for version control throughout, with the repository hosted on GitHub. Since this was a solo project, development ran on a single main branch without feature branching. With no parallel workstreams and no risk of merge conflicts, that simplified workflow was perfectly adequate.

Commits were made at logical milestones — typically after completing a feature, refactor, or bug fix — producing a history that tracks the progression of the system. Continuous integration and release were handled by the GitHub Actions workflow described in Section 3.2.

External dependencies were kept deliberately minimal. Beyond the libraries for JWT handling, cryptography, configuration, and SQLite, all functionality uses the Go standard library. This reduces complexity, limits exposure to supply-chain risk, and keeps the project lightweight.

4. Requirements and Design
4.1 Functional Requirements
The functional requirements were derived from the core authentication lifecycle a developer would typically need when starting a new project:

FR1 — The system shall allow a new user to register with an email address and password.
FR2 — The system shall authenticate a registered user by email and password and return a JWT access token and a refresh token upon success.
FR3 — The system shall provide a protected endpoint that returns the currently authenticated user's information, accessible only with a valid access token.
FR4 — The system shall allow a client to exchange a valid refresh token for a new access token and a new refresh token, invalidating the old refresh token immediately.
FR5 — The system shall allow an authenticated user to log out, invalidating their active session on the server.
FR6 — The system shall provide a health check endpoint that allows clients to verify the server is running.
FR7 — The system shall validate user input at the API boundary, rejecting malformed or missing data with descriptive error responses.

4.2 Non-Functional Requirements
NFR1 — Language agnosticism. The system shall expose its functionality exclusively over HTTP with JSON request and response bodies, imposing no language or framework requirements on the consuming application.
NFR2 — Minimal setup. The system shall be distributable as a single binary requiring no runtime dependencies, and shall be startable with a single command.
NFR3 — Configurable. The system shall be configurable via a YAML file for token expiry durations, storage backend, host, port, and JWT secret, with sensible defaults that allow the server to run without any configuration at all.
NFR4 — Pluggable storage. The system shall support multiple storage backends, selectable at runtime, without requiring changes to application logic.
NFR5 — Secure defaults. The system shall not rely on hardcoded secrets. Where no configuration is provided, cryptographically random values shall be generated at startup.

4.3 API Design
The API follows REST conventions (Fielding, 2000), using standard HTTP methods and status codes to communicate the outcome of each operation. The complete set of endpoints is summarised in Table 1.

Table 1. Summary of ezauth HTTP endpoints.
MethodPathAuth RequiredDescriptionPOST/auth/registerNoRegister a new user with email and passwordPOST/auth/loginNoAuthenticate and receive access + refresh tokensPOST/auth/refreshNo*Exchange a refresh token for new tokensPOST/auth/logoutYesInvalidate the current session server-sideGET/auth/meYesRetrieve the authenticated user's profileGET/healthNoServer status and version check

*Refresh requires a valid refresh token in the request body rather than an access token in the Authorization header.

All responses use a consistent JSON envelope:
{ "success": true, "data": { ... } }
{ "success": false, "error": { "code": "ERROR_CODE", "message": "human readable" } }

The machine-readable code field was a deliberate design choice. A consuming application shouldn't need to parse error message strings to figure out what went wrong — that creates brittle coupling between client and server, where any wording change on the server side silently breaks client logic. Codes like INVALID_CREDENTIALS, EMAIL_ALREADY_EXISTS, and UNAUTHORIZED allow client code to handle errors programmatically. This approach is taken by established APIs such as Stripe, which publishes a fixed set of error codes separate from the accompanying message (Stripe, 2024).

HTTP status codes were chosen to accurately reflect the semantics of each response (Fielding et al., 2022). A duplicate email registration returns 409 Conflict rather than a generic 400 Bad Request — the request was well-formed, it just conflicted with existing state. An invalid login returns 401 Unauthorized rather than 400, correctly indicating an authentication failure.

4.4 Storage Design
A key goal was that the storage backend should be replaceable without touching any business logic. This was achieved through the repository pattern (Fowler, 2002), where data access is abstracted behind an interface. The UserRepository interface defines three operations:

gotype UserRepository interface {
    Create(user User) error
    FindByEmail(email string) (User, error)
    Update(user User) error
}

Any type that satisfies this interface can serve as the storage backend. Three implementations are provided: an in-memory store backed by a Go map, a file-based store that persists users to JSON, and a SQLite-backed store using modernc.org/sqlite. The auth service, handlers, and middleware have no knowledge of which backend is active — they depend only on the interface. This applies the Dependency Inversion Principle (Martin, 2000): high-level modules depend on abstractions, not concrete implementations.

The three backends sit at different points on a trade-off spectrum. The memory backend is fastest, needing no file I/O, but loses all data on shutdown — making it appropriate for quick testing, CI environments, or throwaway prototyping. The file backend persists to a JSON file that's human-readable and requires no external tooling to inspect, but isn't suitable for high-concurrency scenarios since the entire file is read and rewritten on each write operation. The SQLite backend provides a proper embedded relational database with atomic writes and concurrent read safety (Hipp, 2024), and is the recommended default for persistent development use.

To keep domain errors decoupled from storage-specific details, the auth package exposes two sentinel errors: ErrUserExists and ErrUserNotFound. Each repository implementation maps its own storage-specific errors to one of these — a SQLite UNIQUE constraint failure, a missing map key, and a missing record from the file backend all map to the same sentinel. Handlers then use errors.Is to pick the right HTTP status and error code. The backend-agnostic contract extends to error behaviour, not just the method signatures.

4.5 Authentication vs Profile Separation
An early design question was whether to include profile fields like name, phone number, or avatar URL on the user model. The decision was to store only what's strictly necessary for authentication: a UUID, email address, hashed password, hashed refresh token, and refresh token expiry timestamp.

This reflects a deliberate separation of concerns (Dijkstra, 1982). Authentication — verifying identity — is a distinct responsibility from profile management — storing information about a user. Established identity providers like Auth0 make this separation explicit, providing an authentication layer and leaving arbitrary profile data to the application's own database (Okta, 2024). In ezauth, the user_id returned by /auth/me acts as a stable foreign key that the consuming application can link its own records to. A developer building a social platform would store names, profile pictures, and biographies in their own database, referencing the ezauth user_id. This keeps ezauth focused and applicable across a wide range of project types rather than imposing a user schema that different applications would inevitably need to work around.

4.6 Scope Decisions
Several features were considered and deliberately left out. Each exclusion was a conscious decision, not an oversight.

Rate limiting on /auth/login was considered as a defence against brute-force and credential-stuffing attacks (OWASP, 2023). But ezauth is designed for local development and listens on the loopback interface by default — the threat model doesn't include remote attackers. Adding rate limiting would introduce state management complexity, configuration overhead, and potential false positives during legitimate test automation, with no real benefit in the intended environment. It's noted as a consideration for any future production-oriented deployment.

HTTPS was similarly excluded. Implementing TLS requires certificate management, which conflicts directly with the zero-configuration design goal. Self-signed certificates trigger browser warnings that would undermine the "works out of the box" experience, and Let's Encrypt integration would require a public domain and open port 80. For local development over the loopback interface, unencrypted HTTP is standard practice and introduces no meaningful risk — traffic never leaves the developer's machine.

Email verification and password reset were left out because both require an external email-sending service. Integrating an SMTP provider would reintroduce exactly the kind of external infrastructure dependency that ezauth is designed to avoid.

Role-based access control falls under authorisation, not authentication — it's a responsibility explicitly assigned to the consuming application as discussed in Section 2.1. A proper authorisation layer is a substantial design effort in its own right and would have diluted the project's focus considerably.

These aren't shortcomings — they're deliberate scope decisions consistent with the project's purpose as a local development tool. Each is revisited in Section 7 as a candidate for future work.

5. Implementation
5.1 Project Structure
The project is organised into a command-line entry point and a set of internal packages, following the conventional Go project layout (Go Project Authors, 2024):

cmd/ezauth/          CLI entry point (main, init, start, help)
internal/
  api/               Router and HTTP handlers
  auth/              Core business logic, user model, repository interface
  config/            Configuration loading
  httpx/             HTTP utilities (response writing, validation)
  middleware/        JWT validation, request logging
  fileserver/        Static file serving
  templates/         Embedded demo HTML pages

The internal directory enforces package encapsulation — the Go toolchain prevents any external package from importing code under internal, ensuring the authentication logic can't be directly coupled to by outside consumers (Go Project Authors, 2024). HTTP concerns are confined to the api and middleware packages. The auth package contains no HTTP-specific code, making it independently testable and reusable as a library if needed.

5.2 Configuration
Configuration is handled by the config package using Viper (spf13, 2024), which supports YAML files, environment variable overrides, and programmatic defaults. When ezauth start is invoked, the server looks for a config.yaml in the working directory. If none is found, it falls back to defaults and generates a cryptographically random JWT secret using crypto/rand:

gofunc randomSecret() string {
    b := make([]byte, 32)
    rand.Read(b)
    return base64.URLEncoding.EncodeToString(b)
}

This means a server run without configuration doesn't use a predictable hardcoded secret — which is a surprisingly common source of real-world authentication vulnerabilities (OWASP, 2021). The server logs a clear warning that it's running in ephemeral mode, so the developer knows registered users and sessions won't survive a restart. When ezauth init is run, a config.yaml is generated with its own unique random secret, ensuring no two projects share a signing key.

5.3 The Authentication Service
The core business logic lives in internal/auth/service.go. The Service struct holds the repository interface, the JWT secret, and the configured token expiry durations. All authentication operations are methods on this struct.

Registration takes an email and password. The password is hashed with bcrypt, a User struct is created with a UUID, and it's passed to the repository. Tokens are deliberately not generated at registration — account creation and session creation are kept separate, which mirrors how most authentication systems behave.

Login verifies credentials by retrieving the user by email and calling bcrypt.CompareHashAndPassword. On success, two tokens are generated. The access token is a signed JWT:

goclaims := jwt.MapClaims{
    "user_id": user.ID,
    "email":   user.Email,
    "exp":     time.Now().Add(s.accessTokenExpiry).Unix(),
}
token := jwt.NewWithClaims(jwt.SigningMethodHS256, claims)

The refresh token is a 32-byte cryptographically random value, base64-encoded. It's never stored in plaintext — only its bcrypt hash is persisted, alongside an expiry timestamp, in the user record.

Token refresh implements rotation (Lodderstedt et al., 2023). The service retrieves the user by email, checks the refresh token hasn't expired, and verifies the provided token against the stored hash using bcrypt. If valid, new tokens are generated. The old hash is replaced with the new hash before the user record is saved. Any subsequent attempt to use the old refresh token will fail the bcrypt comparison because the stored hash no longer matches it. This property is verified explicitly by the test suite (see Section 6).

Logout clears the user's refresh token and expiry from storage, setting them to empty values. Even if a client still holds the refresh token, it can't use it to get a new session after logout. This is server-side session invalidation — a stronger guarantee than the client-side logout used by many single-page applications, which just discards the token locally without revoking it on the server.

5.4 Login Request Lifecycle
To illustrate how the packages interact, the full path of a login request is traced below. A POST /auth/login request with a JSON body passes through the following stages:

Router dispatch (internal/api/router.go). The router matches the path and method. Method enforcement middleware rejects any non-POST request with 405 Method Not Allowed before the handler runs.
Request logging middleware (internal/middleware/logging.go). The method, path, and response status are logged after the handler returns, giving visibility during development without leaking credentials.
Handler (internal/api/handlers.go). The JSON body is decoded into a typed struct. httpx.ValidEmail and httpx.ValidPassword run on the parsed fields; any failure short-circuits with a structured 400 response.
Service call (internal/auth/service.go). The handler calls service.Login(email, password). The service retrieves the user via repo.FindByEmail, runs bcrypt.CompareHashAndPassword, generates both tokens, writes the refresh token hash back via repo.Update, and returns the tokens.
Repository access (internal/auth/sqlite.go). The SQLite backend acquires its mutex, executes a parameterised query, and returns either a populated User struct or the ErrUserNotFound sentinel. The service maps ErrUserNotFound and bcrypt mismatches to the same INVALID_CREDENTIALS error, preventing email enumeration.
Response writing (internal/httpx/response.go). httpx.WriteJSON serialises the response envelope, sets the Content-Type header, and writes the status code.

Each step has a single clear responsibility, and no step has knowledge of the layers above it — the handler doesn't know which storage backend is in use, and the repository doesn't know its results will be returned as JSON.

5.5 The Router and Middleware Chain
Routes are registered in internal/api/router.go. The middleware stack follows the decorator pattern (Gamma et al., 1994), where each layer wraps the next:

gohandler := loggingMiddleware(
    methodEnforcer("POST",
        jwtMiddleware(
            meHandler)))
router.Handle("/auth/me", handler)

Layers run from outermost to innermost. Logging runs first and last, so it always captures the final response status regardless of where the request terminates. Method enforcement runs before authentication, so an incorrect HTTP method on a protected route returns 405 rather than 401 — more helpful to client developers. JWT validation runs last in the chain, so the handler can assume the authenticated user identity is already in the request context.

This structure also keeps each middleware tightly focused. Adding a new cross-cutting behaviour — rate limiting, say — would mean writing a new middleware function and slotting it into the chain, without touching any existing code.

5.6 JWT Middleware
Protected routes are guarded by JWTMiddleware in internal/middleware/jwt.go. This middleware wraps an http.Handler, extracts and validates the Bearer token from the Authorization header, and then passes the request downstream. On validation failure it returns a JSON error response consistent with the rest of the API:

gohttpx.WriteError(w, http.StatusUnauthorized, "UNAUTHORIZED", "invalid or expired token")

On success, the JWT claims are stored in the request context using a typed context key, so downstream handlers can retrieve the authenticated user identity without re-parsing the token. The GetUserFromContext helper wraps this retrieval and keeps context key management internal to the middleware package — a pattern recommended by the Go documentation to prevent key collisions between packages (Go Project Authors, 2024).

5.7 Input Validation
Input validation runs at the handler layer, before anything reaches the service. Two validators live in internal/httpx/validate.go.

ValidEmail does a structural check — it verifies the input contains an @ character with a non-empty local part and a domain with at least one dot. This is intentionally not a full RFC 5321 compliant check (Klensin, 2008). Full RFC email validation is complex, rejects a surprising number of valid addresses, and is overkill for a development tool. The goal is catching obvious garbage input.

ValidPassword enforces a minimum length of eight characters and a maximum of seventy-two. The minimum catches trivially weak passwords. The maximum is a security measure: bcrypt silently truncates inputs beyond 72 bytes (OpenBSD, 2023), so a 100-character password and a 73-character password sharing their first 72 bytes would hash identically. Capping at 72 eliminates this edge case at the API boundary before it can reach the hashing layer.

5.8 Error Handling
A consistent error response structure is defined in internal/httpx/response.go:

gotype Response struct {
    Success bool        `json:"success"`
    Data    interface{} `json:"data,omitempty"`
    Error   *APIError   `json:"error,omitempty"`
}

type APIError struct {
    Code    string `json:"code"`
    Message string `json:"message"`
}

Every response, successful or not, uses this envelope. WriteJSON and WriteError are the only two paths to writing a response, which enforces consistency across all handlers and middleware. Error codes use SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE, making them straightforward to match in client code without risking false matches on partial substrings within the human-readable messages.

The auth package exposes ErrUserExists and ErrUserNotFound as sentinel errors that repository implementations return for domain-level conditions. Handlers check these with errors.Is and return the appropriate HTTP status code. A duplicate email at registration returns 409 Conflict with EMAIL_ALREADY_EXISTS rather than a generic 400, which lets clients distinguish between a malformed request and a business logic conflict.

5.9 Storage Backends
All three backends implement UserRepository, letting the server select a backend at startup from config without changing anything above. The main differences are in their concurrency models.

The memory backend stores users in a Go map protected by a sync.RWMutex. Read operations acquire a read lock and writes acquire a write lock — safe for concurrent use within a single process, and multiple concurrent reads can proceed in parallel.

The file backend serialises the entire user map to JSON on every write and deserialises on every read, protected by a sync.Mutex. A single lock is enough here since reads and writes touch the whole file. JSON was chosen for human readability — you can open and inspect the user store with any text editor. That's appropriate for the low-write-volume local development context, but the complete-file-rewrite approach wouldn't scale to production.

The SQLite backend uses the modernc.org/sqlite driver, a pure Go SQLite implementation (Cznic, 2024) that needs no C compiler or shared libraries. SQLite serialises writes internally through its journal, so the Go code only needs a sync.Mutex to coordinate access to the shared database handle. The schema is created automatically on first connection:

sqlCREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS users (
    id             TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
    email          TEXT UNIQUE NOT NULL,
    password       TEXT NOT NULL,
    refresh_token  TEXT NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
    refresh_expiry INTEGER NOT NULL DEFAULT 0
)

The UNIQUE constraint on email enforces uniqueness at the database level. A constraint violation is detected by inspecting the error string for UNIQUE constraint failed and mapped to ErrUserExists, maintaining a consistent abstraction regardless of backend.

5.10 CLI and Binary Distribution
The cmd/ezauth package provides three subcommands. ezauth init creates a config.yaml with a unique random JWT secret, an ezauth-data directory for storage files, and a public directory populated with demo HTML pages. ezauth start loads configuration and starts the HTTP server. ezauth version prints the build version, which is injected at compile time via linker flags:

go build -ldflags "-X main.version=$(git describe --tags)" ./cmd/ezauth

Using -ldflags -X to set a string variable at build time is the standard Go idiom for embedding build metadata into a binary (Go Project Authors, 2024) and avoids a generated version file that would need to be kept in sync with the repository.

The demo pages are embedded directly into the binary using Go's embed package, so the binary is entirely self-contained with no external assets to distribute. When ezauth init runs, the embedded files are extracted to the public directory and served as static files at runtime. The demo pages include a registration form, a login form, and a protected account page — all plain HTML using the browser's native fetch API, with no JavaScript framework or build toolchain required.

Binary releases for Windows, macOS (Intel and Apple Silicon), and Linux are produced automatically by a GitHub Actions workflow triggered on version tag pushes. Each binary is compiled with the appropriate GOOS and GOARCH environment variables and uploaded as a release asset. Developers can download and run ezauth without having Go installed.

6. Testing
6.1 Testing Strategy
The testing strategy prioritised integration tests over unit tests. This is worth explaining explicitly, since unit testing is commonly presented as the default best practice in software engineering literature (Beck, 2002). For a project whose primary deliverable is an HTTP API backed by a storage layer, though, unit tests alone don't provide much confidence. A unit test that mocks the repository and checks that the handler calls the right method tells you almost nothing about whether the full system actually works when a real HTTP request arrives, passes through middleware, reaches the handler, interacts with the service, and gets persisted to storage.

Integration tests exercise the entire request path from HTTP request to storage and back. A bug in the middleware chain, an incorrect status code, a missing header, or a signature mismatch between handler and service — integration tests catch all of these. Unit tests that mock those layers would miss them entirely. This is where the real failure modes live.

This approach is consistent with Fowler (2018), who argues that broad-stack integration tests provide stronger confidence in system behaviour at the cost of slower execution and harder-to-localise failures, and that the right balance depends on the nature of the system. For an HTTP service with clear interface boundaries and a small number of well-defined endpoints, the trade-off favours integration tests. In practice, given the suite size and how fast both in-memory and SQLite tests run, the downsides Fowler identifies didn't really materialise.

6.2 Test Infrastructure
The test suite is in internal/api/router_test.go, using Go's standard testing package alongside net/http/httptest, which provides an in-process HTTP server on a randomly assigned port (Go Project Authors, 2024). Each test creates a fresh server instance backed by a new repository, so there's no shared state between tests.

Three helper functions cut down boilerplate. newTestServer creates a server backed by the in-memory repository. newSQLiteTestServer creates a server backed by a temporary SQLite database in a directory provided by t.TempDir(), which Go's testing package removes automatically after the test completes. registerAndLogin runs the register-then-login flow against a test server and returns both tokens, letting tests that need an authenticated session set up in two lines.

The SQLite repository exposes a Close method registered as a cleanup via t.Cleanup, ensuring the database connection closes before the temporary directory is removed. This caused an early test failure on Windows because the OS holds stricter file locks — the directory couldn't be deleted while the SQLite handle was still open. Adding the explicit cleanup hook fixed it, and it was a good reminder of the value of running the test suite on Windows before trusting it.

Two lower-level helpers complete the infrastructure. doRequest sends an HTTP request to the test server with an optional JSON body and Bearer token, returning the raw response. decodeResponse decodes the JSON envelope into a typed struct, giving tests type-safe access to the success flag, data, and error fields without repeated unmarshalling in each test.

6.3 Test Coverage Summary
The suite contains 23 integration tests covering all six endpoints across both the happy path and the main error cases. Table 2 summarises the coverage.

Table 2. Summary of test coverage by endpoint and category.
EndpointHappy pathError / security casesPOST /auth/registerUser created, 201 CreatedDuplicate email (409), invalid email (400), password too short/long (400), malformed JSON (400)POST /auth/loginReturns access + refresh tokensWrong password (401), unknown email (401, same response to prevent enumeration)GET /auth/meReturns authenticated user's infoMissing token (401), invalid token (401), malformed token (401)POST /auth/refreshReturns rotated tokensInvalid token (401), reused rotated token (401)POST /auth/logoutClears refresh token server-sideMissing token (401), refresh after logout rejected (401)GET /healthReturns server status and version—SQLite backendFull register/login/me/refresh flowPersistence verified across repository abstraction

6.4 Key Test Cases
Three tests warrant particular discussion because they verify security-critical properties that a naive implementation would fail.

Duplicate registration. The registration suite explicitly distinguishes between 400 Bad Request and 409 Conflict for duplicate emails. Returning the wrong status code would force clients to parse error message strings to understand what happened — coupling client logic to server wording. The test asserts both the status code and the EMAIL_ALREADY_EXISTS error code.

User enumeration resistance. Login tests verify that an incorrect password and a nonexistent email produce the same 401 Unauthorized response with the same INVALID_CREDENTIALS code. Returning 404 for an unknown email would let an attacker probe for registered addresses (OWASP, 2024). The test makes identical responses an enforced property rather than a convention.

Refresh token rotation. The most important security test verifies that a refresh token can't be used a second time after rotation:

gofunc TestRefresh_ReusedToken(t *testing.T) {
    // First refresh — rotates the token
    first := doRequest(t, srv, http.MethodPost, "/auth/refresh", body, "")
    first.Body.Close()

    // Second refresh with the same token — must fail
    resp := doRequest(t, srv, http.MethodPost, "/auth/refresh", body, "")
    if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusUnauthorized {
        t.Errorf("expected 401 on reused token, got %d", resp.StatusCode)
    }
}

This directly verifies the security guarantee from Section 2.4. If the implementation forgot to call repo.Update after a refresh — leaving the stored hash unchanged — this test would catch it immediately.

Server-side logout. A test verifies that a refresh token is invalidated after logout:

gofunc TestLogout_RefreshInvalidatedAfterLogout(t *testing.T) {
    accessToken, refreshToken := registerAndLogin(t, srv)

    logout := doRequest(t, srv, http.MethodPost, "/auth/logout", nil, accessToken)
    logout.Body.Close()

    body := map[string]string{"email": testEmail, "refresh_token": refreshToken}
    resp := doRequest(t, srv, http.MethodPost, "/auth/refresh", body, "")
    if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusUnauthorized {
        t.Errorf("expected 401 after logout, got %d", resp.StatusCode)
    }
}

This distinguishes server-side logout from client-side logout. A naive implementation that only clears the token on the client would pass a basic logout test but fail this one, because the server-side state would be unchanged and the refresh token would still work.

SQLite backend. TestSQLite_FullAuthFlow runs the complete register, login, /auth/me, and refresh flow against a real SQLite database rather than the in-memory store. This verifies that the backend correctly persists and retrieves user data, and more importantly that the repository interface abstraction holds across implementations — any observable behavioural difference between the two backends would show up here.

6.5 Results
All 23 tests pass consistently. Total execution time is around three seconds, dominated by bcrypt hashing rather than I/O, since bcrypt's cost factor is intentionally slow (Provos and Mazières, 1999). No mocks are used — every test exercises real bcrypt hashing, real JWT signing and verification, and real storage operations. That has a small cost in runtime, but it means no test can pass against a broken dependency because a mock was hiding the problem.

The suite has been run on Windows, macOS, and Linux through the GitHub Actions CI pipeline, confirming consistent behaviour across all target platforms. No platform-specific issues remain after the Windows file-locking problem described in Section 6.2 was resolved.

7. Evaluation
7.1 Requirements Review
This section evaluates ezauth against the functional and non-functional requirements from Section 4.

FR1 — Registration. Users can register via POST /auth/register. Input validation catches missing fields, malformed emails, and passwords outside the permitted length range before anything reaches the service. Duplicate emails return 409 Conflict. Requirement met.

FR2 — Login. Registered users authenticate via POST /auth/login and receive a signed JWT access token and a cryptographically random refresh token. Invalid credentials always return 401 with the same INVALID_CREDENTIALS response regardless of whether the email is unknown or the password is wrong, preventing enumeration. Requirement met.

FR3 — Protected route. GET /auth/me is protected by JWT middleware that validates the token signature and expiry before the request reaches the handler. Invalid or missing tokens are rejected with a structured JSON error response. Requirement met.

FR4 — Token refresh with rotation. POST /auth/refresh exchanges a valid refresh token for new tokens and immediately invalidates the old one. Expired and previously used tokens are rejected. Requirement met.

FR5 — Logout. POST /auth/logout clears the user's refresh token and expiry from storage, invalidating the session server-side. Subsequent attempts to use the old token are rejected. Requirement met.

FR6 — Health check. GET /health returns 200 OK with server status and version. Requirement met.

FR7 — Input validation. Email format and password length are validated at the handler layer. All failures return structured error responses with specific codes. Requirement met.

NFR1 — Language agnosticism. The API is accessible over HTTP with JSON payloads. The README includes working examples in curl, JavaScript, and Python, each integrating identically. Requirement met.

NFR2 — Minimal setup. Binaries are available via GitHub Releases for Windows, macOS, and Linux with no runtime dependencies. The server starts with ezauth start and needs no prior configuration. Requirement met.

NFR3 — Configurable. Port, host, JWT secret, token expiry, storage backend, and file paths are all configurable via config.yaml or environment variables. Sensible defaults cover everything. Requirement met.

NFR4 — Pluggable storage. Three storage backends are available and selectable at runtime via the storage config key. Switching backends requires no changes to any other layer. Requirement met.

NFR5 — Secure defaults. A cryptographically random 256-bit JWT secret is generated at startup when no config file exists. Projects initialised with ezauth init get their own unique secret. The hardcoded default from earlier development was removed before the final release. Requirement met.

7.2 Security Analysis
Beyond the functional requirements, the security properties of the implementation warrant evaluation against established guidance (OWASP, 2024).

Password storage. Passwords are hashed with bcrypt using the default cost factor from golang.org/x/crypto, which at the time of writing is 10 — consistent with current OWASP recommendations for interactive authentication (OWASP, 2024). The 72-character input limit prevents the bcrypt truncation edge case from Section 2.2. Passwords are never returned in API responses and never written to logs.

Timing attack resistance. Password comparison uses bcrypt.CompareHashAndPassword, which is implemented to run in constant time relative to password length rather than returning early on the first differing byte (Provos and Mazières, 1999). This prevents side-channel attacks that infer information from response timing. The same property applies to refresh token verification, which uses the same bcrypt primitive. The user enumeration countermeasure described below provides analogous protection at a higher level: the login endpoint always performs a bcrypt comparison even when the email isn't found, against a dummy hash, so response time doesn't reveal whether the email exists.

Refresh token storage. Refresh tokens are stored as bcrypt hashes rather than plaintext. A full database compromise doesn't expose usable tokens — reversing the hash is computationally infeasible for a sufficiently random value.

Token rotation. TestRefresh_ReusedToken demonstrates that reusing a rotated token is rejected. Once the legitimate client refreshes, a stolen copy of the old token is useless. This is consistent with the OAuth 2.0 Security Best Current Practice (Lodderstedt et al., 2023).

User enumeration. INVALID_CREDENTIALS is returned for both an unrecognised email and a correct email with a wrong password, making it impossible to determine from the response whether a given email is registered.

JWT secret uniqueness. Each project initialised with ezauth init gets a unique 256-bit random secret. Tokens from one ezauth instance can't be verified by another.

Known limitations. Two security limitations are worth acknowledging. First, there's no HTTPS support. Passwords sent during login and registration travel in plaintext over HTTP. This is acceptable on the loopback interface during local development but would be unacceptable for any publicly accessible deployment. Second, access tokens can't be revoked before expiry. Logging out clears the refresh token, but any outstanding access token remains valid for the rest of its lifetime — up to five minutes with the default configuration. A token revocation list would fix this at the cost of storage overhead and a database lookup on every protected request, which is a trade-off more appropriate to a production deployment than a local development tool.

7.3 Language Agnosticism in Practice
The central claim of ezauth — that it works with any language or framework — can be verified directly. The following three requests, in different languages, all interact with the same running ezauth instance:

bash
# curl
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:8080/auth/login \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"email":"user@example.com","password":"password123"}'

python
# Python
import requests
r = requests.post("http://localhost:8080/auth/login",
    json={"email": "user@example.com", "password": "password123"})

javascript
// JavaScript
const r = await fetch("http://localhost:8080/auth/login", {
  method: "POST",
  headers: {"Content-Type": "application/json"},
  body: JSON.stringify({email: "user@example.com", password: "password123"})
});

All three receive the same JSON response containing an access token and a refresh token. The consuming application needs no authentication library, no SDK, no knowledge of the server implementation language — only the ability to make an HTTP request and parse JSON, which every modern language supports. This validates the central design premise.

7.4 Reflection
With hindsight, a few things would be done differently in a second iteration.

The biggest one is the repository abstraction. The in-memory backend was written first, and the interface was only extracted when the file backend was added. Extracting the interface up-front — even with only one implementation — would have forced cleaner separation between the auth service and storage from the start, and adding SQLite later would have been smoother. This is a familiar lesson: abstractions are easier to design when at least two concrete implementations exist (Ousterhout, 2018), but waiting for the second implementation before defining the interface tends to mean retrofitting rather than designing.

Error handling would also benefit from being standardised earlier. The inconsistency between the JWT middleware returning plain text and handlers returning structured JSON was only caught by a failing test. Writing a short note on the response envelope format before implementing any endpoint would have prevented the inconsistency entirely.

The testing strategy proved genuinely useful, but a second iteration would add a handful of unit tests for the validation helpers and the JWT parsing code. Those functions are pure and self-contained — unit tests would be cheap to write and fast to run, and they'd catch a class of regressions like off-by-one length errors without needing a full HTTP round-trip.

Finally, the decision to use Go's embed package for the demo pages came relatively late in the project, after initially serving static files from disk. Using embed from the outset would have simplified the release pipeline and removed the asset-copying step from ezauth init. The retrospective observation is that single-binary distribution constraints should inform early implementation decisions rather than being bolted on at the end.

None of this indicates a failure in the delivered system. These are the kinds of lessons that only become visible once a project is complete — and an iterative approach tends to surface them faster than a plan-driven one would.

8. Conclusion and Future Work
8.1 Conclusion
This project set out to address a real gap: the lack of a language-agnostic, zero-dependency authentication server for local development. As the review in Section 2 shows, existing solutions are either too tightly coupled to a specific language or framework, too complex to configure for a development context, or dependent on external hosted infrastructure. ezauth addresses these limitations by providing a standalone binary that exposes a complete authentication API over HTTP, requiring nothing of the consuming application beyond the ability to make an HTTP request.

The system implements the full authentication lifecycle — registration, login, token refresh with rotation, logout, and protected route validation — backed by JWT access tokens and bcrypt-hashed passwords. Three storage backends are provided through a repository interface, letting developers choose between in-memory, file, and SQLite storage without any change to application logic. The server is configurable via YAML, supports environment variable overrides, and generates unique cryptographic secrets per project. Demo pages embedded in the binary provide a working frontend without any client code required.

A test suite of 23 integration tests verifies every endpoint across the happy path and the main error cases, including security-critical properties like refresh token rotation and server-side session invalidation. All tests pass against both the in-memory and SQLite backends, and the suite runs successfully on Windows, macOS, and Linux via CI.

The project shows that a developer tool doesn't have to trade simplicity for correctness. Through deliberate scope decisions — excluding profile management, rate limiting, and HTTPS — ezauth stays focused on the problem it's designed to solve while implementing the security properties that actually matter in its intended context. The single-binary model and zero-configuration startup together fulfil the goal of making authentication accessible in minutes, regardless of the developer's language or framework. All seven functional and all five non-functional requirements have been met.

8.2 Future Work
Several directions for future development were identified during the project. Each is feasible within the existing architecture and represents a natural extension rather than a change in direction.

HTTPS support is the most significant missing feature for any deployment beyond local development. Adding TLS termination — either with a self-signed certificate for development convenience, or via Let's Encrypt for exposed instances — would make ezauth viable in staging environments without compromising the zero-configuration startup mode for local use.

Rate limiting on /auth/login and /auth/register would protect against brute-force and credential-stuffing attacks in network-accessible deployments. A simple fixed-window in-memory limiter keyed per IP address would be sufficient for most use cases and could be implemented as an additional middleware without external dependencies, slotting cleanly into the chain from Section 5.5.

Access token revocation via a short-lived blacklist would close the gap between logout and token expiry, ensuring a logged-out session can't continue accessing protected resources within the token's remaining lifetime. The database lookup overhead could be mitigated by an in-memory cache of recently revoked token identifiers.

Additional storage backends — specifically PostgreSQL and MySQL — would extend ezauth's utility to teams already operating a shared database. Because the repository interface already abstracts all storage operations, a new backend means implementing three methods rather than touching existing code.

Role-based access control would push ezauth into the authorisation domain deliberately excluded in Section 4. Letting developers assign roles to users and include role claims in the JWT would reduce the need for consuming applications to maintain their own permission systems for simple use cases, while more complex models would remain the application's responsibility.

Password reset and email verification would complete the account management lifecycle, though both require an external email service. Any such integration would need to be optional and configurable, to preserve the zero-configuration model for developers who don't need those features.

OAuth 2.0 and social login support would let users authenticate via third-party providers like Google or GitHub. Doing this properly means supporting the authorisation code flow with PKCE — a well-specified addition to the existing API, though not a trivial one.

Together, these extensions could move ezauth from a local development tool towards a lightweight production-capable authentication service. But an important question for any future work would be whether to actually pursue that direction — or to preserve the project's current focus on simplicity and zero-configuration by resisting the pull toward feature parity with heavier alternatives. The strength of ezauth lies precisely in what it doesn't do.

Bibliography


Intro
Hanson, J. (2024) Passport: Simple, unobtrusive authentication for Node.js. Available at: https://www.passportjs.org/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Laravel (2024) Laravel Breeze. Available at: https://laravel.com/docs/starter-kits (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Okta (2024) Auth0 Documentation. Available at: https://auth0.com/docs (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
OWASP (2021) OWASP Top 10:2021. Available at: https://owasp.org/Top10/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).

Literature review
Fielding, R.T. (2000) Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures. PhD thesis. University of California, Irvine. Available at: https://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Hanson, J. (2024) Passport: Simple, unobtrusive authentication for Node.js. Available at: https://www.passportjs.org/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Hardt, D. (ed.) (2012) The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework. RFC 6749. Internet Engineering Task Force. Available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749 (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Hashcat (2023) hashcat – advanced password recovery. Available at: https://hashcat.net/hashcat/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Jones, M., Bradley, J. and Sakimura, N. (2015) JSON Web Token (JWT). RFC 7519. Internet Engineering Task Force. Available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519 (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Laravel (2024) Starter Kits – Laravel Documentation. Available at: https://laravel.com/docs/starter-kits (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Lodderstedt, T., Bradley, J., Labunets, A. and Fett, D. (2023) OAuth 2.0 Security Best Current Practice. Internet-Draft draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics-24. Internet Engineering Task Force. Available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
NIST (2017) Digital Identity Guidelines. NIST Special Publication 800-63-3. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology. Available at: https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Okta (2024) Auth0 Documentation. Available at: https://auth0.com/docs (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
OpenBSD (2023) bcrypt(3) – OpenBSD manual pages. Available at: https://man.openbsd.org/bcrypt.3 (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
OWASP (2024) Password Storage Cheat Sheet. Available at: https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Password_Storage_Cheat_Sheet.html (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Peyrott, S. (2018) The JWT Handbook. Auth0. Available at: https://auth0.com/resources/ebooks/jwt-handbook (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Provos, N. and Mazières, D. (1999) 'A Future-Adaptable Password Scheme', in Proceedings of the 1999 USENIX Annual Technical Conference. Monterey, CA: USENIX Association, pp. 81–91.
Red Hat (2024) Keycloak – Open Source Identity and Access Management. Available at: https://www.keycloak.org/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Richardson, L. and Ruby, S. (2007) RESTful Web Services. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media.
Supabase (2024) Supabase Auth Documentation. Available at: https://supabase.com/docs/guides/auth (Accessed: 17 April 2026).


Methodology
Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Beck, K. et al. (2001) Manifesto for Agile Software Development. Available at: https://agilemanifesto.org/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Fowler, M. (2018) IntegrationTest. Available at: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/IntegrationTest.html (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Jones, M., Bradley, J. and Sakimura, N. (2015) JSON Web Token (JWT). RFC 7519. Internet Engineering Task Force. Available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519 (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
OWASP (2021) OWASP Top Ten. Available at: https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/ (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Provos, N. and Mazières, D. (1999) 'A Future-Adaptable Password Scheme', in Proceedings of the 1999 USENIX Annual Technical Conference. Monterey, CA: USENIX Association, pp. 81–91.

Requirements

Dijkstra, E.W. (1982) 'On the role of scientific thought', in Selected Writings on Computing: A Personal Perspective. New York: Springer-Verlag, pp. 60–66.
Fielding, R., Nottingham, M. and Reschke, J. (2022) HTTP Semantics. RFC 9110. Internet Engineering Task Force. Available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9110 (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Fowler, M. (2002) Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Hipp, D.R. (2024) SQLite Documentation – Appropriate Uses For SQLite. Available at: https://www.sqlite.org/whentouse.html (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Martin, R.C. (2000) Design Principles and Design Patterns. Available at: https://web.archive.org/web/20150906155800/http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/Principles_and_Patterns.pdf (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
OWASP (2023) Credential Stuffing Prevention Cheat Sheet. Available at: https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Credential_Stuffing_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Stripe (2024) Stripe API Reference – Errors. Available at: https://stripe.com/docs/api/errors (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
(The Fielding 2000 and Okta 2024 references are already in your bibliography from earlier sections.)

Implementation
Cznic, J. (2024) modernc.org/sqlite – Pure Go SQLite translator. Available at: https://pkg.go.dev/modernc.org/sqlite (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R. and Vlissides, J. (1994) Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Go Project Authors (2024) Effective Go. Available at: https://go.dev/doc/effective_go (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
Klensin, J. (2008) Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. RFC 5321. Internet Engineering Task Force. Available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5321 (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
spf13 (2024) Viper: Go configuration with fangs. Available at: https://github.com/spf13/viper (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
(Lodderstedt et al. 2023, OpenBSD 2023, and OWASP 2021 are already in your bibliography from earlier sections.)

Testing
Beck, K. (2002) Test Driven Development: By Example. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Fowler, M. (2018) IntegrationTest. Available at: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/IntegrationTest.html (Accessed: 17 April 2026).
(OWASP 2024, Provos and Mazières 1999, and Go Project Authors 2024 are already in your bibliography from earlier sections.)

Evaluation
Ousterhout, J. (2018) A Philosophy of Software Design. Palo Alto, CA: Yaknyam Press.
(OWASP 2024, Provos and Mazières 1999, and Lodderstedt et al. 2023 are already in your bibliography from earlier sections.)


